Turn 93 (January 1st, 1980 - January 1st, 1981): New Decade Optimism
Resources per Turn(RpY): Base 17620 -275 Rocketry -7235 Plan Commitments -70 Commitments Cost Modifier -500 Debt Repayment = 9540 with 775 in storage


Internal Politics:


Changes in the composition of the Supreme Soviet have come as a consequence of past political activities and the victories of the last plan. For all the significant mistakes committed, a period of growth, universal improvement in living standards, and a direct and visible means of improvement has led to a strong favoring of the center in elections. Far right attacks on Ryzhkov have in effect cost him his majority in the Supreme Soviet with a strongly reduced block but one that has become far more ideologically unified in the process of losing its right wing. Vorotnkikov in the meantime has enjoyed a near complete lack of significant attacks from the left outside of perfunctory ones, allowing some of his more rambunctious allies to be shed away and the rest of the faction consolidated behind him.

In the pre-vote to appoint a new Chairman of the Supreme Soviet, what were expected to be loyal Stalinists and Left Communists have immediately split, seeing Vorotnikov as a symbol of anti-soviet power and immobile conservatism respectively splitting in the vote to bring the motion to discussion. The discussion somewhat escalated to yelling with the faction itself starting to fight amongst themselves to little progress. Vorotnikov did not take special offense at the matter, likely judging the matter of handing the Stalinists an internal factional one with Zimyanin out of politics to truly threaten him. From internal assessments the embarrassment has likely stemmed from insufficient favors for the left of the faction, but the voting continued with a motion to reinstate Ryzhkov pushed forward by his allies.

Compromise amongst the center alongside likely a genuine desire for Vorotnikov to avoid consolidating all of the posts under one chair led to a somewhat easy confirmation of Ryzkov without excessive debate. Technocrats from the faction expressed support but managed to do the bare minimum of keeping discipline in the vote to bring the motion to discussion, at least demonstrating a modicum of unity in spite of it all. From a more practical sense in politics, as long as Vorotnikov can be kept on side and the faction maintained in a seemingly unified state, a threat from the Supreme Soviet is not expected. Changes in the domestic situation will change that, but that is to come in a few years alongside a non-preventable economic collapse about which nothing can be done.

Attempts to escape the gilded cage of the ministry have entirely failed across the last year as even direct attacks on Vorotnikov were somewhat interpreted as maneuvering to consolidate the Stalinist and far left wings more so than a personal offense. In the view of Vorotnikov, the maneuver was an internal masterstroke of consolidation rather than something that caused offense, maintaining good relations in backroom meetings. Combining backroom dealings with conventional conservatives and a strong base of support from the far left are going to be enough to keep the ministry stable but that is fundamentally meaningless. There is no position of Chairman or General Secretary waiting and any performance but the physical replication of an impossible delusion fit for drunkards will kill anyone that touches the leadership of the ministry.

Minor squabbles over social policy and foreign policy are going to continue through the course of the plan of course, but they are as good as irrelevant compared to the greater challenge. It's almost certain that the Saudis are exaggerating their economic oil reserves, the gulf states to a greater extent. Ministry extraction figures for Iran and Iraq have all but confirmed lower economic fractions than initially expected and there is little cause to doubt that other nations are in a worse state of reserves. Exponential growth in oil demand has started across CMEA and is already a fact of life for most of the West especially as the South American economic boom only accelerates in scope and reach with US demand predicted to reach a theoretical zenith sometime in the 1990s without an interruption. There is not enough oil for either with partial expert consensus reached internationally but none will listen and none will care until major supply collapse starts from some stupid thing in the Middle East.




Rocketry

Continued program evaluations on the new tri fuel engine have reached the point of static testing with the worst of the pump development issues finalized to a production capable example. Work on the associated An-335 has been somewhat slower than the MAKS vehicle itself as the latter will be ready for flight in the next two years while the military progress on the An-335 has been delayed by engine supply issues combined with airframe stability testing being extended. An actual first flight at the current pace of the project is expected at some point between 1983 and 1985 with a small cargo delivered to orbit followed by a landing and recovery of the spacecraft. Some ideas to utilize a nuclear engine have been proposed but have been discredited both due to the significant fuel storage concerns and the believed irradiation issues inherent to current centrifugal designs.

Starting operations somewhat behind the American program, the launch of the first satellite with a triplex cross-verified atomic clock capable of high precision and consistent measurement has started the process of constellation construction. A full array is expected to take approximately thirty operational satellites to achieve enhanced triangulation for areas of interest in Europe and the Western USSR while military operations in the rest of the world will be confined to an approximate three meter precision standard. Development of the new satellite bus has forced the launches to use the more expensive RLA-3 for boosting them into orbit as no other appropriate heavy booster exists for the task, but with an operational duration of approximately ten years even a leisurely launch pace will be enough to sustain current operations. Constellation functionality is not expected until later into the decade, providing allied and domestic military formations with accurate navigational information on any point of the globe.

Evaluation of the newly developed RD-0510 engine for use in a mass simulation impactor launched via the expected Zarya trajectory has verified the performance of the engine, achieving the planned TLI, Capture, De-orbit, and terminal acceleration burn and yielding a significant amount of information on the moon's composition as a part of testing. An accelerated trajectory with a forty three ton simulation payload was chosen with an impact between Luna 19 and Luna 23, providing a massive degree of seismic information. Testing of the landing stack has been underway emphasizing terrestrial evaluations alongside a re-entry test from a suboptimal trajectory with an uncrewed VA capsule launch verifying the important aspects of the mission. Further testing is still required as the docking of the crew landing module to the RD-0510 propulsion bus remains in question due to the short timeframe involved. A temporary dock of the crew module to a previously emplaced PKA-VA capsule with additional life support resources is planned in case of a scrubbed simultaneous launch, providing something of an alternative go-abort window but the entire process needs more evaluation.

Acceleration of the American program has increased the pressures on the domestic program as in spite of accelerated timeframes for the nuclear engine much of the landing stack remains untested in an orbital environment. Terrestrial static testing has verified any component that can be independently verified with the computer system running a far more advanced solid state based autopilot with significant simulator verification. Derivative work from the Luna program has evaluated many of the concepts in alternative form factors but the fundamental truth is that the launch profile has two significant areas where an abort cannot be conducted. If the nuclear engine fails in a critical point of the capture burn, then an abort cannot be conducted, further if the pressure fed engine fails either during the landing or takeoff burns then no abort will be possible. Several components in the profile are fundamentally non-redundant and flying the mission will be a risk, just one that must be taken with increasing American pressure to achieve a first landing.

Initial development work on the Energia program has come down to two discrete efforts with one prioritizing the development of an advanced aluminum alloy to reduce latent mass while the other has pushed for a comprehensive overhaul to previous engine systems. A unitary bell high energy platform capable of a one hundred and eighty second burn utilizing twin preburners has been demanded with industry largely moving to replicate the work done for the RLA engines. The somewhat simpler pumping structure of the Methane-Oxygen fuel mixture has enabled the theoretical design to pursue a higher chamber pressure and compensate for the lack of thrust inherent to a lighter primary fuel. Methane itself has been seen as an optimal choice due to the depletion of local high grade kerosine deposits starting to distort the cost balances of the program as the sourcing of fuel has steadily increased cost burdens. Parallel gains in the nuclear engine program and supporting it are a benefit that can become significant in a decade, but for now the choice of propellent has been all but forced through economic-depletion factors.

A second cascade of mercury launches have been sent with both reaching the target, if failing due to the sensitivity of the onboard electronics. More advanced solid state systems have struggled to compensate for the increased solar radiation and failed on the approach due to inadequacies of heat dissipation. Improving reliability of the nuclear propulsion bus has reliably delivered the probes to the target with future launches expected to only improve in nuclear engine capabilities as more advanced and reliable systems continue to be produced. Environmentalist agitation over the irrelevant at this point four melted down and four intact nuclear stages orbiting the sun has been largely irrelevant, and propaganda has started to discredit such activism ahead of time despite increasing American agitation in support of slowing the nuclear program. As long as a victory is delivered or the program canceled, it's not expected to become a significant problem, but work to undermine the ecological position must start now before some gormless imbecile in the Supreme Soviet actually listens to them.

Initial encounters with Saturn by the first duplex of Outer planets probes have gone well, with a Pluto bound trajectory adjusted for both of them, performing some minute RCS adjustments to the gravitational assist to guarantee an intercept. Outside of the first images of Saturn from a close perspective and a view of the ring system, this has also marked the furthest object ever sent out by humanity, continuing to go out into the outer system and likely the kuiper belt if the onboard electronics keep functioning. Second wave probes with more advanced camera systems onboard are inbound for their Jupiter gravitational assists sometime next year with a Uranus encounter in 1985. Of the two first wave probes, Pluto encounters will occur in 1986, providing images of the distant planet. Exploring the remainder of the Solar system will take until 1988 as the 1979 launched probes cross Neptune's orbit.

Pioneering the bounds of material science in the development of advanced nuclear propulsion concepts has imposed thousands of challenging technological problems, but nothing that has been insurmountable. Test evaluations of centrifugally confined liquid uranium has been fraught with a single active channel design demonstrated in a ground test, if one that vented off the hot propellent gas. Evaluations for accelerations up to one g and viable flow rates of methane, water, or ammonia have started being planned as the second stage of the program as current emphasis has focused on the confinement of actively cooled mixed state liquid enriched uranium at 5500K with active external. Successful ground fires across the next year with a reduced single channel example will likely confirm the initial technical work involved in the new RD-0550 concept engine, with subsequent work transitioning towards the use of seven primary drums to increase thrust, neutron efficiency, and energy.

Building on civilian work the military has started emphasizing designing around an independent power circuit for onboard weaponry, emphasizing a high capability multiple megawatt reactor and radiator system to drive a Q switched CO2 pulse laser. The core itself has directly derived from the oceanographic satellite program, aiming to use a high temperature braton turbine as a primary option with secondary funding going towards either MHD-reactor harvesting or a second generation RD-0550 derived dual purpose propulsion bus capable of energy production. Development of the onboard laser system has been emphasized as the demand for the sustained elimination of orbital satellites are immense in both power and lensing capabilities, practically necessitating a several ton len, turret assembly, and much of the internal volume to be committed to laser pumping infrastructure. VLS tubes copied from the fleet are expected to be mounted with light solid fueled layered tungsten dart cloud utilizing interceptor missiles, to be used to eliminate stations and other infrastructure by striking down from MEO-Geostationary orbital bands.

Initial US attempts to achieve an accelerated lunar launch following an unmanned orbital test have gone poorly as the first American manned test has failed. Instability in the likely rushed from political concerns first stage booster caused severe asymmetrical thrust due to a side casing breach on booster 2. A high g spin followed without the ability to escape from the rapidly destabilizing lunar bus resulting in the death of three astronauts from the disintegration of the entire launch vehicle. Advantages in production will still produce a capable American system before even the most ambitious domestic timescale, but it is not expected that President Brown will risk the politics of a second failure with a full lunar mission without at least a test launch. Any domestic programs will have to account for the fact that the US may still achieve a first landing with enough aggression, but the title of first onto the moon can be achieved with a mixture of daring and domestic scientific work. The obvious counter-argument is that a well tested safe second position can easily be spun, likely surrendering the victory but not sacrificing more for a first that may not come.

[]Authorize Zarya: The Zarya-L-VA bus has been evaluated on the ground without significant errors and to ensure that the Soviet Union lands on the moon first a plan for a launch in early 1981 must be initiated. Accelerated schedules for the construction of the spacecraft alongside a backup variant to be launched later in the year will start now so as to expand capabilities for putting the first man on the moon. American priorities are almost certainly going to emphasize further acceleration of the program and there is little reason to delay as to be blunt, the cost of failure is miniscule relative to the glory of success.

[]Prioritize Testing: None of the landing stack has been evaluated in any environment approximating space or the moon and conducting a series of two test launches before a crewed mission will ensure that a costly failure does not happen to the Soviet space program. Gambling with lives has been the norm of space exploration but there is a degree of risk taking that is too much to endure. An unmanned rehearsal of the entire stack with a landing will be conducted first with a full evaluation and a second return module will be landed onto the surface to offer the possibility of return in case of ascent engine failure. A manned launch is not expected until mid 1982 to ensure a degree of backups, but the hardware is expected to be far more reliable with some delays.


Free dice to allocate 6 Dice.
Infrastructure: (18) 10 Dice

[]Western Local Roads(Stage 3/3): Finalization of the Western road effort promises to overcome the backwardness of the countryside and provide a basis for securing appreciable road interlinks into the rural interior. This would emphasize the last few kilometers of roads that are frequented by heavy transportation alongside the paving of key agricultural and industrial corridors that cannot be otherwise relocated for access to trucking. Expansion of near-urban and last mile warehousing has been instrumental in reducing the latency of goods and continuing current programs will somewhat finalize the transition away from older forms of development so as to improve overall efficiency. (150 Resources per Dice 111/600)

[]Caucuses Local Roads(Stage 2/2): With localized surges in funding alongside a comprehensive effort to develop primary routes roads to villages can finally be funded at scale. Local development has been systematically neglected for the entire history of the Union and a strong effort now will break out of that backwardness. Improved logistical transportation will be key for shipping materials to and from the leading luxury agricultural region in the Union and further serve to improve integration as goods can more easily reach rail terminals. Intensification of local agricultural development somewhat depends on water access but being able to transport perishable goods faster will radically transform their availability across the entire Union. (160 Resources per Dice 12/350)

[]Ural Region Local Roads(Stage 1/2): Lack of stable terrain due to freeze thaw cycles, lack of technological confidence, and a lack of general will to construct local roads have significantly undermined regional economic activity. Strong growth is dependent on the increase in extent of local urban and rural infrastructure with paving campaigns paired with the construction of a vast number of urban boulevards. Many cities have been somewhat negligibly designed away from proper transportation concepts, requiring further funding for demolition work so as to rationalize current practices and improve local logistical throughput for last mile movement off railheads. (180 Resources per Dice 0/250)

[]Central Asian Local Roads(Stage 2/3): Reversing past mistakes through funding is both viable and incredibly politically popular as the local road networks are still likely to be barely sufficient in the near term. Development now must emphasize the construction of expanded urban centers and the practical reality of significant spread outside of conventional housing zones brought on by rapidly growing populations and other insufficiency. For a number of political reasons, development must be somewhat prioritized locally as improving conditions of the most rapidly growing region of the Union and assisting in modernizing its economy will lift millions out of poverty and secure significant political support for what is to come. (150 Resources per Dice 125/500)

[]Automotive Infrastructure(Stage 3/5): Just because the automotive industry is unsustainable and dependent on a glut of cheap industry does not mean that it is not necessary or impossible to make it more efficient. Advances in traffic control measures, congestion pricing options and an increase in storage density can all minimize fuel use through structural factors under the guise of reducing congestion while improving outcomes for motorists. The necessary infrastructure and funding for the area is not going to be remotely economical relative to other means of petroleum use minimization but it still must be considered due to solving two problems at once and further minimizing time workers spend achieving nothing of economic value. (150 Resources per Dice 50/400) (-1 Petroleum Fuels)

[]Black Sea Coaling Terminals: Supplies of Australian coal are desperately necessary to support rapid western economic development as deep structural insufficiencies of development require a temporary solution through imports. River reversal and its accompanying canals promise to solve the problem in half a decade but the Union does not have half a decade of stable domestic energy supplies if radical action is not taken. Opening primary harbors for the high volume import of Australian coal alongside developing the transfer infrastructure to move it onto the deep water system will take time, but it will temporarily stabilize the worst instability in current price-indexes. (180 Resources per Dice 0/175) (-15 Coal Price from Imports)

[]Deepening Primary Deep Water Channels: The march West of coal and lignite cannot be interrupted by any means and working to make it more efficient will be key to overcoming near-future shortfalls in industrial fuel supplies. Locks to pass the Urals with very heavy barges still need reinforcement while river ports and channels need significant dredging to improve their depth and enhance the navigable portions of the rivers. This will involve a significant investment of both time and resources but to lower the costs of coal and prepare for hardening the Union it must be done. (150 Resources per Dice 0/250)

[]Modernization of Sewage Transportation: Increasing the throughput of urban sewage flows and underwriting the development of denser urban areas will provide several advantages in overall development. Abortive projects towards the same goal were abandoned by more pressing economic demands but the matter can still be considered as a means of minimizing the trucking of sewage and consolidating infrastructure. Expansion of pipes and dumping areas will start the process of improving local conditions and adding redundancy to a network that will be unlikely to be funded for the next decade at a minimum. (180 Resources per Dice 0/400) (-1 Petroleum Fuels)

[]Deepening Power Infrastructure: Current habits of vast electrification combined with the de-urbanization of significant portions of coal power due to the significant effects on air quality have led to the demand for a vast drive to improve transmission infrastructure. Expansion of high and medium voltage lines alongside primary distribution substations will be started in areas of intensive industrial development to set the baseline supply for several key plants and indirectly subsidize the purchase of electrical high intensity equipment. Production programs to that end will emphasize the need for higher throughput systems, accelerating the modernization of industry by bearing some of the capital costs through a collective means. (240 Resources per Dice 0/325)

[]High Voltage Rural Lines: Moving areas outside of cities towards more efficient forms of heating is going to have significant advantages alongside improving electrical access in general, but that will take investment and time. Many towns have electricity but a limited amount of capacity that runs into significant limits as homes have electrical systems that cannot handle more then 8A while lines that were constructed during the initial ambitious electrification drive were never meant for modern demands, especially not in the case of heating. Surplus power capacity for the latter can be used for several industries as a means of grid balancing and freeing some local coal and heavy fuel oils will provide a greater reserve capacity. (200 Resources per Dice 0/450)


Heavy Industry (20) 12 Dice

[]Krasnoyarsk-Irkutsk Metallurgical Complexes(Stage 2/3): Continuing funding to build out a key steel producing industry and further continue the decoupling of Steel from other energy sources is going to be necessary in the long term. Local iron is not exceptional but it is still sufficient for most industrial uses. Pioneering techniques with reduced iron based production of primary arc furnace steels has already been verified in smaller experiments, allowing the technique to be scaled significantly. Local mass production complexes are going to continue outputting material to the bulk of the industrial base past the Ural, securing a stable supply of materials with few transportation expenses. (220 Resources per Dice 61/200) (-10 Steel -1 Non-Ferrous +1 General Labor +1 Educated Labor) (Hydroelectric Powered)

[]Secondary Metallurgical Complexes: Secondary steel can be salvaged to a large extent from the current steel economy. Despite strong export pressures, the domestic sector for steel utilization is strong and produces an excess of scrap steel. To meet domestic steel demand and minimize the need for reducing agents in production an expanded program for recycling steel can be started. Effective waste filtering has already been established and combustion processing inherently involves the separation of metal products. This will also yield some limited aluminum and copper, but those are secondary and far harder to filter from garbage streams. (240 Resources per Dice 0/125) (-61 CI8 Electricity -6 Steel -1 Non-Ferrous +1 General Labor)

[]Kansk-Achinsk Deep Pit Mining(Stage 1/10): There is more brown coal and lignite than the Union can practically process in the current millennium directly under the ground in vast easy to access reserves. Changing the focus away from an expensive program emphasizing local processing and semi-coking to blatant high rate extraction will require additional resources and the construction of coal production equipment heavier than any before it but a solution to the current energy problem is now readily available. Focused funding will be sufficient to overcome most limitations in production and while immediate transportation costs will be high, they can be resolved once the new Siberian lake is born. (250 Resources per Dice 100/125) (-41 CI5 Electricity -15 Coal +1 General Labor) (+150 RpY Costs until 1983)

[]Synthetic Oil and Lubricant Program(Stage 1-10): Practically infinite reserves of coal including higher grade ores can be used for conversions to liquid fuels and accompanying secondary chemical components. Bulk processing of coals through syngas cracking for the production of primary fertilizers and high efficiency synthesis gas is already done at scale but it can be vastly expanded. Direct combustible fuel yields from the program are somewhat secondary to the vast quantities of improved synthetic lubricants and precursors that can be produced, in effect significantly upgrading the value of local coals and substituting oil from an alternative direction supported by direct local extraction. (280 Resources per Dice 0/200) (-52 CI7 Electricity -3 Petroleum Fuels -6 Petrochemicals +1 General Labor +1 Educated Labor)

[]Factory Computerization Drives(Stage 1/4): Any modernization of local computer systems will be based on the tightening of monitoring and control systems so as to improve local production efficiency. Emphasis for initial experiments will aim to follow on enterprises that have already adopted control systems to serve as an introductory point to the centralization of control inputs and outputs allowing software to be developed to that effect. Modernization and direct upgrades of production infrastructure in itself will have to be somewhat done first as the expensive and bulky systems are neither ready for production at scale nor is their accompanying hardware present in sufficient numbers. (360 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-52 CI7 Electricity -2 General Labor +1 Educated Labor) (High Profitability)

[]Electrification of Industries(Stage 1/8): Conventional fuel inputs for several processes can be directly substituted for electrification so as to minimize the use of more scarce products and take advantage of vast changes to grid architecture. Shifting industries towards electricity on the basis of minimizing supply inputs will be challenging but it must begin now to truly harden industries. Obsolescent machinery utilizing fuel, steam, or coal to provide power is still present in a significant number of factories and needs to be replaced for the sake of overall industrial efficiency. Lower end conversions will focus on the areas of traction and lower end machinery with less industrial demands but a comprehensive effort will eventually be necessary to entirely shift away from a fuel based paradigm. (320 Resources per Dice 0/225) (-68 CI12 Electricity) (High Profitability)

[]Proliferation of Computational Control(Stage 1/2): Even obsolete equipment that operates on an electrical basis can be retrofitted for more modern computational control systems with a basic compatibility software. Starting budgetary programs to tighten control environments and improve in factory networking alongside mandating that new production systems have some form of electronic integration can start early and provide significant returns for a comparatively small degree of disruption. Manufacturing end changes will support further reforms in the sector as new production will conform to standards and enable an easier later program of general modernization. Expansions of integrated circuit controllers for current and somewhat older tooling will come at costs, but the Union has afforded far worse. (400 Resources per Dice 0/175) (-24 CI5 Electricity +1 Non-Ferrous -1 General Labor +1 Educated Labor) (Modifies Industrial Labor Dynamics) (Extreme Profitability)

[]Expansion of CNC Production(Stage 1/5): There is very little actual purpose in producing machinery that is already obsolete rendering a significant portion of conventional machine building industries conceptually useless. Obsolescence as a part of design and systemic inefficiencies in design standards have continuously held back domestic industries but as a late mover into the computational control field the Union does have some advantages. Production of modern transistorized electronics is growing exponentially providing a sufficient base for significant production changes and the techniques are mostly known, only necessitating overhauls in production and the building of new plants. The reality on the ground is that any newly constructed factories will take years to reach any operational state, leaving the program necessary to advance as rapidly as possible to support further industrial changes. (400 Resources per Dice 0/225) (-69 CI8 Electricity +2 Steel +1 Non-Ferrous +1 General Labor +2 Educated Labor) (Modifies Industrial Labor Dynamics) (Very High Profitability)

[]Industrial Robotics Production(Stage 1/2): Japanese and Western Industrial robotics is a promising field of labor minimization across most industries and its implementation during a vast glut of electricity can provide significant advantages to many industries. Developing standardized machinery capable of programmed and standardized handling of parts alongside systematic engineering of old production lines with complete modernization packages will be important for improving production and forming a basis for further development. Industry is not entirely prepared to use them but the likely lead time on any wide scale computerized production system equipped factories will provide the margin necessary to produce equipment. (420 Resources per Dice 0/200) (-58 CI6 Electricity +1 Steel +1 Non-Ferrous +2 Educated Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Advanced Machinery Licensing: Working directly with Japanese companies to directly bypass technological restrictions has intensified with several formal partnerships already made, but these can be taken a step further. Taking the funding to directly pay for combined programs with Toshiba, Mitsubishi, and Nippon Electric will be key as all three corporations have proven more willing to act as avenues of technological transfers. American approaches to levy fines for the sale of restricted technologies are meaningless when the purchase contract can cover the fine without issue and the corporations have signalled a willingness to push through with such deals as long as a sufficient scale is maintained. This would establish production lines for advanced industrial machinery and serve as a massive technological transfer well beyond the past scope, establishing effectively primarily Soviet owned factories in and around Vladivostok. (500 Resources per Dice 0/125) (-65 CI10 Electricity +2 Non-Ferrous +2 Educated Labor) (Extreme Profitability)

[]Comprehensive Production Modernization(Stage 1/3): Production centric changes to improve manufacturing and heavy industrial equipment directly will come at significant costs in industry but a significant portion of the technical base is now obsolescent and requires modernization. Replacement of ultra heavy presses with new more capable models will lower general production costs and emphasize efficiency in areas where heavier industry is the most viable route towards modernization. Experience in the construction of ultra-heavy machinery will be used from several technological programs, establishing a series of primary forging facilities. Modernization of specialty machine building will be associated with the program even if it will take more time. (350 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-54 CI8 Electricity +4 Steel +2 Non-Ferrous +2 General Labor +1 Educated Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Process-Heat Recovery Standards: Starting funding and creating a commission to impose waste heat standards and provide funding for meeting them can significantly lower overall industrial energy consumption. Waste heat release is currently mostly disposed of with process efficiency deprioritized due to the availability of cheap energy but taking measures now can provide systematic changes in industrial energy use. Increasing electrification of industrial processes will somewhat inherently reduce the need for recovery but implementing the standard now will cut down on the worst excesses over the next decade. Rolling implementation of standards will only require funding in so far as paying for modernization but it can be achieved for a relative pittance. (250 Resources per Dice 0/300) (+20 CI20 Electricity -4 Coal -4 Petroleum Fuels -2 Petrochemicals)

[]Experimental MHD Based Power Plants: Theoretical harvesting of energy from primary combustion through a magnetohydroplasmodyamic choke has been demonstrated in laboratory examples but so far not in full scale power infrastructure. The development of a pilot combined cycle gas and coal plant taking advantage of the technology can be undertaken to improve overall economic efficiency and further improve the yields of somewhat limited energy reserves while reducing the pollution burden of the energy sector. A direct refit for harvesting during flue gas processing would be ideal, but near term technical viability is not optimistic. (275 Resources per Dice 0/75) (+15 Electricity)

[]Fusion Reactor Experimentation: Verification and industrial production of superconducting magnetic elements has resolved several core issues present in smaller tokamak reactors and funding a larger one can provide a route to leaving the current energetic paradigm. Evaluation of a 3m external diameter torus with superconducting magnets will theoretically be able to breach positive energy balances assumptions on plasma stability are accurate but an economically viable fusion reactor is not coming for another decade even if the current core verifies the techniques involved. More so a propaganda project of a clean source of energy that still has some optimism, results in a necessary timeframe are not expected but several of the more optimistic can be persuaded by funding it. (300 Resources per Dice 0/100) (-4 Electricity)


Rocketry (5) 3 Dice (Cannot Use Free Dice)

[]Cancel Project(Does not take a Dice)(10<Projects=<15, -2 Dice) (Funding Cap Irrelevant(275))
-MAKS Program (-10 RpY)
-Positioning System Programs (-10 RpY)
-FGB-VA Crewed Exploration (-10 RpY) Constant Program
-Zarya Lunar Stack (-40 RpY)
-Cryogenic Energia (-100 RpY)
-Mars Program (-10 RpY) Constant Program, Rover Focused
-Mercury Program (-5 RpY)
-Outer Planets Program (-5 RpY)
-Long Term Orbital Nuclear Power (-10 RpY)
-Orbital Operation Programs (-25 RpY)
-Nuclear Drive Program (-50 RpY)
-Anti Orbital Interceptor (Military Funded)
-Heavy Laser Program (Military Funded)
-Orbital Combatant Design (Military Funded)

[]General Purpose Heavy Launcher: Obsolescence in the design of the RLA has required extensive development projects to close the gap and further lower prices. Increased modernization capabilities alongside the development of a new engine system for midweight launches can improve tonnage launched and provide the basis for an improved RLA-3 alike configuration. Single central boosters represent significant cost reductions and the model of the RLA project has more than verified itself. Development will thus aim towards a similar modular core stage based on a new engine architecture and a more advanced fuel tank layout so as to vastly expand orbital payload capacity while lowering prices. (-35 RpY Expected) (Subvote) (1 Dice)

[]Lunar Surface Development Program: The practical settlement of a research base onto the moon requires solutions to several essential technical problems. Local sourcing of long duration life support materials can significantly simplify logistical flights while further efforts towards understanding the environment for the purpose of locally sourced construction methodologies can sharply reduce mass costs. Evaluations done now will center on the development of a habitat capable of local construction alongside systems for reducing dependence on constant supply flights alongside developing the basic modules necessary to start a lunar base. (-20 RpY Expected) (1 Dice)

[]Space Station Program: A comprehensive space station capable of long term storage for astronauts and a degree of artificial gravity is believed to be possible. Monolithic launches using the new Energia system will consist of one hundred and sixty ton modules, merged in orbit to create the basis for twelve men to inhabit and provide vast quantities of information on how to inhabit space for a prolonged period of time. The technologies involved will be expensive, but establishing a foothold beyond a few dozen propellant depots will form the basis of a proper aerospace presence both for peaceful exploration and for national prestige. (-40 RpY Expected) (1 Dice)

[]Closed Cycle Life Support Concepts: Development of near fully closed life support systems will be required to sustain lunar bases alongside further long range missions and starting the program now will be essential for the construction of new stations. Launch of heavy cargo alongside the development of a true super heavy launcher will form the infrastructural base required for the establishment of long duration stations with all that is left developing the lift support package. The more the life support loop can be closed, the easier large scale habitation can be sustained. (-20 RpY Expected) (1 Dice) (Subvote)

[]ISRU Construction Programs: Sourcing local construction materials through the development of industries on the moon remains a somewhat open question, but one that can be solved. Regolith is believed to be able to be converted to concrete and several useful basic construction materials, allowing prefabricated sections to be utilized as a means to build shelter and radiation shielding. Development of the techniques themselves will depend on securing more soil alongside a more accurate regional chemical composition but there is no practical reason that it cannot be done. (-15 RpY Expected) (1 Dice) (Subvote)

[]Mission to the Asteroids: Sending an automated mission to the asteroid belt in order to rendezvous and prospect across metal rich rocks will be a major step and one that can form the basis of a future program to properly extract vast quantities of precious metals. A nuclear powered probe will be able to match velocities and perform several soft propulsive landings with the nuclear stage abandoned. Some proposals call for a heavy transfer bus to enable a number of small probes with pressure fed storable engines to explore several prospective nearby metal rich rocks but those trajectories still must be planned and will impose significant weight limitations. (-20 RpY Expected) (1 Dice) (Subvote)

[]Non-Rocket Launch Methods: Rockets can only bring mankind so far in the exploration of space and further technological developments can bridge the gap. There are several concepts for launch ramps, elevators, loops, and a series of higher mass proposals. Constructing one would involve a massive commitment of funding well beyond the scope of availability but a smaller scale evaluation program can evaluate the immediate technological viability of some of the proposals. Large scale habitation of space cannot be done without abandoning the tyranny of the rocket equation and cheap launch mass can ensure that the American program is reduced to an obsolescent side-note. (-15 RpY Expected) (1 Dice)


Light Industry (6) 4 Dice

[]General Use Computer Production(Stage 1/2): Previous designs for a conventional moderate power home computation system have achieved significant gains in both cost reduction and availability. Investing into those enterprises now and committing strongly to improving them will aid educational, commercial, and more general quality of life efforts to improve society. Supplies of solid state devices have improved to a point that a viable product exists for general use across CMEA and committed to supplying it with both modern machinery and the trained workforce required. Expansion of the schooling program alone will be essential for providing the basis for the future economy, supporting general growth and development. (320 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-44 CI5 Electricity +1 Steel +2 Non-Ferrous +1 General Labor +1 Educated Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Multipurpose Industrial Computing(Stage 1/2): Cloning work from the general purpose computer and early seventies era transistorized microcomputers, a general purpose expandable industrial computation rack can be developed and produced at scale. Medium power general purpose transistorized computers will form the backbone of local control systems and provide a means for further modernization and networking across the workforce. By establishing the industrial basis for producing and designing true high capacity units now, they will be available later on in the plan to form the basis for more general industrial modernization, lowering costs, improving capabilities, and significantly aiding in modernization programs. (350 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-52 CI5 Electricity +1 Steel +3 Non-Ferrous +1 General Labor +2 Educated Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Scaling of Primary Chipmaking Industries: Every new engraving and lithography machine that is produced is practically immediately put into production and establishing minimum baselines of purchases across much capacity will stabilize the market and enable even more aggressive investment. Speculative funding to several enterprises pushing techniques alongside a balanced demand initiative that will pay a ratio per transistor and storage volume that varies per year will force demand into place for further utilization and act as both a strong subsidy and strong incentive for modernization of direct production capacity. Domestic industry is rapidly improving in capabilities but backstopping it will provide future stability and likely slightly accelerate its expansion. (360 Resources per Dice 0/125) (-39 CI6 Electricity +2 Non-Ferrous +1 Educated Labor) (High Profitability)

[]Automation of PCB Assembly Work: Taking heed of Japanese techniques to reduce the burdens for PCB assemblies with the automation of placement and use of even smaller elements can reduce prices across several types of electronics. Automation of the production of general assemblies and unifying machine standards for their production can yield immediate industrial gains at a somewhat marginal price as the sector shifts away from manufacturing labor to the use of machinery capable of high rates of production. Programs will emphasize the changeover, in effect providing low cost capital and loans to enterprises willing to make the change and save funding by freeing labor towards other tasks. (300 Resources per Dice 0/200) (-45 CI6 Electricity -3 General Labor +1 Educated Labor) (High Profitability) (Modifies Industrial Labor Dynamics)

[]Microcontroller Industrial Efforts(Stage 1/2): Small scale microcontrollers are instrumental to a vast number of electronic devices and consumer products with smart appliances already starting to proliferate in the West. Starting the same programs domestically will somewhat improve energy efficiency and provide the means to integrate more capable systems across a vast variety of direct consumer goods. Even something as simple as a controlled kettle can be sold for vast sums of money and improving both yield rates and capabilities will provide immediate lower end profits while obsoleting older transistor programs. (300 Resources per Dice 0/175) (-15 CI15 Electricity -1 General Labor) (High Profitability)

[]Air Conditioner Plants(Stage 7/7): Continued developments in the air conditioning sector are required to maintain the development of comfortable domestic housing. Smaller homes and older apartments are being modernized but at an inadequate pace with the acceleration of conventional construction. Further programs to increase the throughput of cooling systems can ensure that the oldest housing stock is modernized and brought into a comfortable state of living over the next decade. Once sufficient production capacity is established efficiency improvements are expected to provide a sufficient demand impetus to maintain profitability, solving the standard of living crisis compared to the Americans. (140 Resources per Dice 133/250) (-74 CI6 Electricity +2 Steel +2 Non-Ferrous +1 General Labor)

[]Consumer Pharmaceutical Production(Stage 1/2): The soviet worker has enjoyed an adequate supply of general purpose medications but it has been noted that cheaper more mass-utilization ones have been overwhelmingly imported. Developing the domestic industry to the point it can take on these demands is crucial with funding primarily allocated towards scaling up production. Incorporation of improved standards for the medications has somewhat raised the price of production but that can be compensated for with funding alongside a strong domestic expansion of already proven enterprises that currently supply the majority of the domestic sector. (180 Resources per Dice 96/150) (-32 CI4 Electricity +3 Petrochemicals +2 Educated Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Synthetic Textile Mills(Stage 2/3): Synthetic fibers offer a solution to previous labor issues and more importantly a cheap way to utilize the vast number of workers moved out of assembly line work. The production of textiles from synthetic feedstocks eliminates several demands for water and cotton and improves import independence. The primary aim for high production rate work across several towns is to offer a consistent job with adequate pay to maintain local workforces as mills can be established somewhat flexibly. Improved chemicalization of textile production is only going to continue and there is little reason to not embrace the trend. (120 Resources per Dice 56/200) (-38 CI1 Electricity +6 Petrochemicals +4 General Labor) (High Profitability)

[]Secondary Plastics Industries: Plastics are objectively superior to any contemporary product produced in the Soviet Union and current shortages of non-ferrous metals can be somewhat compensated for through the rapid adoption of plastics. Increased production of containers and several other thermoplastic products for use in general use of durable goods will be key to lowering the demand for metals and conserving them for more important sectors. In practice, the reduction in metal use will be minimal if only due to the likely rapidly rising demand for new goods overtaking any savings. (180 Resources per Dice 0/200) (-36 CI3 Electricity -2 Non-Ferrous +6 Petrochemicals +2 General Labor) (High Profitability)


Chemical Industry (14) 8 Dice

[]Exploitation of the East Siberian Basin(Stage 2/2): Several untapped reserves still exist deep in the East Siberian basin that can be exploited to maintain fuel supplies. Domestic utilization of oil is going to only continue its rapid increase into a further unsustainable margin brought on by its low price necessitating the steady development of reserve supplies. Local fields are in themselves somewhat suboptimal due to limitations in extraction but must still be considered as far more technically viable relative to arctic oils. (150 Resources per Dice 42/125) (-31 CI4 Electricity -3 Petroleum Fuels -3 Petroleum Gas +1 General Labor) (High Profitability)

[]River Reversal Zone Petroleum Extraction: With the flooding of several oil reserves the time to start adaptation work is now. Shortfalls in domestic oil production cannot be endured as speculative instability at current prices has already been significant. Improving confidence by recovering previously believed to be irrecoverable fuel is going to be essential to improve overall economic confidence. Construction of derricks in the area will be necessary to compensate for flooding of reserves with costs increasing appreciably due to the worsening production state. Continued loss of deposits is expected with future gains likely to be limited by changing conditions. (240 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-12 CI4 Electricity -5 Petroleum Gas) (Limits Petroleum Fuel Losses from RR to +3) (No Profitability)

[]Modernization of Oil Fields(Stage 3/8): Deep and systematic modernization of oil production equipment so as to improve recovery fractions needs to start now with priority falling to currently utilized fields well over those planned to stop production. Immediate funding must be applied and at as high a scale as possible so as to aggressively replace old equipment and prevent the further increase in irrecoverability of in place oils. No equipment made before the current decade would ideally be operated but that world does not exist leaving the only option aggressive overhauls and modernization. The only advantage is that in the future the rapid expansion of production will establish a reserve for crash expansions during global price instability. (160 Resources per Dice 52/200) (-30 CI4 Electricity -4 Petroleum Fuels -5 Petroleum Gas) (High Profitability)

[]Enhanced Mixed-Fluid Fracturing(Strage 1-10): Initial test cases for viscosity modifying fluid injection have proceeded at several of the more modern wells with polymer injections believed to make even currently waterlogged wells somewhat viable through increasing rock penetration. Evaluation on areas with well known ground and at a small scale can be started now to pioneer more advanced recovery techniques and improve general yields. Production of a high quantity of polymers alongside the demand for very high pressure secondary wells is a minor price relative to the possibility of improving domestic oil and gas recovery alongside recovering from the mistakes of the past across several fields. (200 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-48 CI6 Electricity -2 Petroleum Fuels -5 Petroleum Gas +2 Petrochemicals +1 General Labor) (High Profitability)

[]Tertiary Recovery Processes: Steam flooding has already started implementation in more modern wells but test cases utilizing supercritical water or carbon dioxide remain a likely viable way towards improving recoverability. Modification of deposit viscosity holds immense promise for improving recovery from otherwise somewhat depleted areas allowing drilling campaigns to revisit old fields believed to be depleted and taking advantage of more modern equipment so as to improve recovery fractions. The techniques may not work but Western documentation of their attempts is decent and at least a slight increase in the recovery of oil is expected. (240 Resources per Dice 0/100) (-40 CI8 Electricity -3 Petroleum Fuels -3 Petroleum Gas) (High Profitability)

[]Shale Experimentation(Stage 1/4): Expanded processing of heavy oil shales in the Bazhenov formation has proceeded for the last decade with few practical results but further investment alongside improved technologies have brought some viability to the practice. An ambitious program of modernization will be necessary to overcome current energy limitations and secure further energy resources. Continuous-up estimation of shale reserves in place has been underway for the last decade with several theories encompassing the formation as a possible alternative to the exploitation of arctic oils if those prove too technologically challenging. (220 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-34 CI8 Electricity -4 Petroleum Fuels -2 Petroleum Gas +1 General Labor) (High Profitability)

[]Flue Gas Processing(Stage 1/6): Direct resulting flue gasses from the combustion of coal have several desirable products as contents and can improve general air quality without vast investment into the process. Efforts to harvest them will solve many initial issues with sulfuric precursors while eliminating some of the most notable issues inherent to sacrifice zones. Initial evaluation programs will emphasize the changeover of smaller facilities that are closer to population centers so as to improve ecological quality and evaluate the equipment but nothing will prevent a wider program to eliminate a major source of pollution. (250 Resources per Dice 0/100) (-20 CI3 Electricity -2 Petrochemicals) (High Profitability)

[]Expanded Syngas Processing(Stage 1/2): Conversion of gasified coal into a vast series of precursors based on syngas yields has long been proposed with several even having ideas for power stations based on the concept, but it has not yet been implemented at scale. Focused efforts to start replacing significant portions of ammonia production and moving them to coal precursors with high volatile fractions such as those present in the lignite fields will be essential for lowering fertilizer prices and providing a series of stable baseline chemicals. Methane production from coal has limited impacts and secondary products of the process can be useful in a number of industrial applications. (240 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-35 CI5 Electricity -2 Petroleum Gas -5 Petrochemicals) (Very High Profitability)

[]Continued Synthetic Rubber Programs: Continued deep modernizations and expansions of the domestic rubber industry offer a way to significantly improve domestic incomes while increasing independence. Direct expansions of the industry are technologically possible through improved techniques, providing flexible and higher-performance polymers to several other critical industrial areas. Work on the overall rubber industry is only expected to increase as the automotive and general industrial sectors reach maturity with the demand for improved sealants and synthetic products rapidly increasing. (240 Resources per Dice 0/125) (-41 CI6 Electricity +2 Petroleum Fuels +2 Petroleum Gas -5 Petrochemicals +1 Educated Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Next Generation Plastics Programs: Expanding the production of specialty and engineering plastics is somewhat of a distraction with the strong growth of the industry but one that still needs to be addressed. New and improved feedstocks and a rapidly developing chemical industry driven by cheap energy is a viable export industry and one that can significantly contribute towards domestic growth. Increasing funding for the more experimental applications of new plastics including the wholesale replacement of stainless steel in some applications will be key to improving domestic competitiveness and technological sophistication. (240 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-41 CI6 Electricity +4 Petroleum Gas -4 Petrochemicals +1 Educated Labor) (High Profitability)

[]West Siberian Gas Wells(Stage 3/10): Vast quantities of gas exist all across Siberia and they are absolutely critical for maintaining the current energy markets. The transition to the use of gas will not come without radical changes and by ensuring the price remains near the well-price enterprises can be encouraged to switch and take pressure away from the oil sector. Any deficiency in energy will have to be overcome through the intensification and expansion of gas extraction and there is a practically unlimited quantity under the Siberian basin. Experiments with enhanced recovery methods will be further trialed, expanding the reservoirs that can be tapped. (180 Resources per Dice 38/150) (-30 CI8 Electricity -7 Petroleum Gas +1 General Labor +1 Educated Labor) (High Profitability)

[]CNG Vehicle Conversions(Stage 1/40): The current transportation sector represents an almost insurmountable gulf in fuel use that cannot be met by any reasonable means. There is no practical way to convert transportation to new fuels due to the scale of the program far exceeding any reasonable state capability to achieve it, leaving the only practical measure one of partial and state centric adaptation. Focused efforts on the modernization of buses and heavy trucking with add-on diesel to dual-fuel conversion kits will minimize fuel use significantly and provide a degree of durability for transportation prices. Implementation will have to be conducted through a mixture of mandates and a continuously low gas price as changeovers can only practically be justified in the current economic paradigm of gas use. (180 Resources per Dice 0/300) (-3 Petroleum Fuels +3 Petroleum Gas) (Can only Progress When Petroleum Gas Price < Petroleum Fuels Price - 20) (High Profitability)

[]Methanol Fuel Programs(Stage 1/5): An end goal of replacing 5% of all gasoline fuels with methanol will significantly improve octane, enhance engine performance, and more importantly provide a direct route to substitute LNG for gasoline. Processing of natural gas to methanol is a somewhat energy intensive process but one that can be done cheaply for the quantity produced if conducted at scale and one that is competitive with current oil industry practices. Increasing the percentage above 15% is unlikely to be viable due to gains in vapor pressure but that is far from being achieved through any remotely reasonable program. Secondary increases in octane will improve fuel efficiency and replace lead in higher end fuels, but that in itself will take time that the Union does not have. (250 Resources per Dice 0/125) (-62CI4 Electricity -4 Petroleum Fuels +4 Petroleum Gas) (High Profitability)


Agriculture (6) 4 Dice

[]Domestic Meat Programs(Stage 8/10): High throughput density optimized production of pork has demanded improvements in land use along key industrial areas, somewhat forcing the use of multi-story towers for the densified storage of growing pigs. The use of standardized feeds has already provided significant advantages and improving thermal conditions are expected to further minimize infrastructural and land use limits. Verification of the model will accompany focused programs to increase the density of pork in other facilities, taking advantage of improved faster growing breeds of pigs alongside steady improvements in antibiotic therapies. (150 Resources per Dice 89/250) (-36 CI1 Electricity +1 General Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Free Range Beef Programs(Stage 1/4): Cheap free range beef can be grown in vast amounts on the newly settled areas caused by river reversal. Initial planting of higher density grases onto the steppe has already started to provide an optimal area for growing cattle and minimal funding can be allocated to create hundreds of small and large cattle producing enterprises and businesses. General work towards improving domestic beef supplies will lower prices and take advantage of land that will not be suited towards conventional utilization for the next two decades as soil cover must be established before primary agriculture can move into newly reclaimed areas. (100 Resources per Dice 0/200) (-14 CI1 Electricity +2 General Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Development of Luxury Cultivars: Expanding funding towards the development of sugar beets, local fruits, and agriculture in the Caucasus can significantly stimulate development in the region and help supply local demand. Improving infrastructural access has rendered vast tracts of land somewhat viable for economical production for general supply, offering significant incentives to transition agriculture towards more efficient goods. Local food crops can steadily be replaced through a series of financial incentives to provide for the workers, improving the income of farmers and providing a direct domestic supply of luxuries. (120 Resources per Dice 0/175) (-22 CI1 Electricity +1 General Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Expanded Water Use Initiatives: With the turn of the northern rivers it is now possible to loosen regulations on reasonable water use and arable land area, but that can also be used as a means to modernize them. Set amounts of efficient water use are sufficient to irrigate several acres but emphasizing a per acre use limit alongside providing low interest grants for the expansion of drip irrigation in the primary river reversal area will increase water use, but far more effectively settle the virgin lands. Areas previously using channels from the aral catchment can replace their water supplies with feedwater sent south from the Ob making the entire region more efficient and far more productive. (200 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-25 CI4 Electricity +4 Petrochemicals +1 General Labor) (Very High Profitability)

[]Fruit Expansion Program: Increasing the focus on new fruits will provide a vast number of jobs to otherwise under-served communities and improve the overall economy. Agricultural profitability will not be raised by further expansions of grain but through a strong commitment to alternative means of production. In effect enterprises in more Southern areas will be provided benefits in water allocation alongside regular tax benefits for the localization of fruit production. Practical impacts will be limited as the trees grow but significant profits can be realized in the next few years. (150 Resources per Dice 0/175) (-11 CI1 Electricity) (High Profitability)

[]Water Efficiency Programs: The defining factor of the agricultural industry is the inputs put into the soil with the material acting more so as a temporary storage medium than an inherent factor. Continuing to provide improvements in water efficiency will stabilize the supply of one essential part of the equation as the chemical industry hammers away at feedstock shortages from the other direction. Drip irrigation requires a vast amount of plastic to implement and sustain but given the domestic industry that can be met to entirely solve issues of water accessibility. We now have the opportunity to break away entirely from the cycle of droughts that has plagued Russia and the Union, all that is needed is a final decisive effort. (120 Resources per Dice 93/350) (+6 Petrochemicals) (High Profitability)


Services (10) 4 Dice

[]Gosbank Expansions(Stage 1/2): Banking services have substituted in for proper state funding for most private businesses and the majority of enterprises across the last plan. Expanding the servicing of debts and further enabling them will be essential to continuing current economic growth. Service area growth in finance is likely to sustain more general economic growth across the plan and support primary growth sectors. If trends continue, financial services access will enable accelerated gains in other sectors with private use rapidly increasing out of a mixture of convenience and improved returns. (150 Resources per Dice 0/150) (-26 CI2 Electricity +2 General Labor +1 Educated Labor) (High Profitability)

[]Digital Payment Methods(Stage 1/2): The use of standard communications infrastructure to process payments is somewhat conventional but American developments in the field must be matched by domestic ones. Commercializing immediate credit can improve convenience for most customers by providing a single card instead of a varying amount of cash. Further programs to properly do transfers over networked systems have already been proposed, with implementation dependent on the construction of more conventional networking, there is still enough infrastructure to trial it in several more built up urban areas as a far more convenient mechanism for handing money. Few practical changes are expected outside of a moderate increase in financial sector profitability, but that in itself will support further economic growth. (200 Resources per Dice 0/100) (-28 CI2 Electricity) (High Profitability)

[]Wireless Communications Networking: Paralleling and repeating the developments of Western first generation wireless systems is going to be necessary to bring urban workers an improved degree of overall communication. Analog forays into signaling and phone calls over the air represent significant technical gains and ones that can be reached with entirely domestic production. Efforts to start development will focus on major urban centers first so as to provide the most tangible gains with the technology likely to be distributed as it improves in sophistication. (200 Resources per Dice 64/100) (+1 General Labor) (High Profitability)

[]Transportation Enterprises(Stage 5/5): Further increases to local truck stocks will increase the demand in the rapidly growing automotive industry but for once it can mostly need the demand. Production of cabover vehicles has increased nearly twenty-fold in the last decade with further gains expected as large and small transportation enterprises are expanded. Work towards improving throughput and efficiency can still be done in collaboration with further road construction to bring the Union into the modern era of internal transportation. (180 Resources per Dice 204/250) (+5 Petroleum Fuels +4 General Labor) (Locked Until Stage 2 Western Local Roads is Completed) (Very High Profitability)

[]Second Wave Hotel Programs(Stage 3/3): Expanded bulk production hotels can be shifted towards the development of luxury areas over the construction of more general purpose infrastructure. Higher end luxury hotels with a lower floor dedicated for amenities remains highly in demand and a major aid for business, functioning as a lower cost convention center for enterprises. Funding will serve to employ more workers, provide decently paying non-industrial work, and expand the ability of Soviet business accommodations to compete with those in the West. A forward approach for enterprise interactions with their foreign contemporaries will significantly improve the situation with some secondary gains in typical worker quality of life during more expensive vacations. (150 Resources per Dice 75/150) (-25 CI2 Electricity +2 General Labor) (High Profitability)

[]Expanded Barcoding(Stage 3/3): There is no greater revolution in conventional retail or commerce than the use of barcodes with the technology itself practically changing the nature of verification. Current implementation will be limited towards entirely changing over the railway system towards its use alongside standardizing it across all roadside freight to avoid mistakes in transport. The unification of internal standards will remove most mistakes in internal coordination and establish the systems that will be used for a vast number of population focused applications. The use of a single reliable and quickly scanned code can eliminate medical errors, simplify checkouts at all stores, and even serve as a fast way to verify identification cards if scanner costs continue on their current trends. (180 Resources per Dice 31/200) (-35 CI2 Electricity -2 General Labor) (Extreme Profitability)

[]Professional Services Program: Expanding the state arm of professional service enterprises through hiring graduates directly from their programs and using the approach as a means of training is not optimal but a significant benefit for other enterprises. Most professionals tend to practice as independent businesses rather than for the state, leaving the current priority the only rational one for optimizing economic growth. The near doubling of state centric legal and advising bodies will also be a useful service for enterprises due to the low costs involved, enabling consolidation of their staffs and a general increase in efficiency. (150 Resources per Dice 0/125) (-20 CI3 Electricity +2 Educated Labor) (High Profitability)


Bureaucracy 8 Dice

[]Dedicate Focus Towards a Project(): (1 Bureau Dice for +5 per dice on a project, +15 in Chemical Industry) (Unrolled)

[]Organize an Energy Commission: The complete failure of the last three energy commissions to achieve anything has been a product of divided political aims and excessive oversight but a true commission of experts can now be funded. There is a degree of scientific agreement that can be utilized to provide justifications for more aggressive policy to address the future crisis and keeping it away from the supreme soviet will do the conclusions it makes some good. As long as the scientists do not do something particularly idiotic, the justifications provided will separate any lacking performance from actual lack of performance. (1 Dice)

[]Eliminate Ecological Regulations: Extraction of necessary energy resources is far more important than a number of localized ecological limitations on extraction. Clearing the entire set will make some enemies but likely increase investment from enterprises into areas of necessary industrial development, enabling the utilization of otherwise virgin fields. Cost reductions from eliminating ecological concerns are not going to be significant but competition with the Americans somewhat necessitates the change as they are almost certain to eliminate theirs assuming the government changes due to economic unpopularity. (1 Dice)

[]Minimal Recovery Standards: The basis for new permitting for significant oil extraction can be organized on the basis of minimal recovery fractions, practically mandating a plan for enhanced recovery operations with any newly developed well. This will impose some additional capital costs in the short term but improvements to domestic production and technology are likely to overcome them. Old wells will still demand modernization and investment costs will increase but that is irrelevant compared to the increasing amount of oil made available through having concrete plans on how to operate future wells for as long as possible. (1 Dice)

[]Car Trim Mandates: Mandates for all passenger, light cargo, and government use to have an all-gas powered trim must be implemented for the sake of improving overall development and enhancing parallel use technologies. The low price of gas and the necessity of minimizing foreign imports will play into the approach even if most consumers are unlikely to purchase the vehicles until local infrastructure supports the use of compressed gas over the use of conventional petroleum fuels. Cheap gas is going to continue being the primary source of energy for much of the Union and ignoring its potential is only going to damage the automotive sector. (1 Dice)

[]Energy Source Greening: The ecological agitators are mostly useless but can be somewhat targeted for useful causes so as to enhance political support. Clean drilling initiatives are a delusion, but political support can be gained from presenting flue gas filtering programs and flare gas recovery as pollution reducing measures. Further efforts to harvest sulfur from conventional exhaust can be presented as a means of cleaning the otherwise quite dirty coal and a general war against urban smog. The reality of it all is somewhat irrelevant but the environmentalists can at least prove somewhat useful if they agitate for the correct targets. (1 Dice)

[]Gasification of Heavy Vehicles: Conversion of most of the current diesel using vehicles with dual use kits can be done for little money and it offers a significant reduction in fueling costs. Starting the efforts with cost reductions for those making the conversion and mandating a ten year period for the conversion for most primary urban bus models will start progress in that direction and serve to harden the general transportation sector. Improvements in technology are not necessary at this point, only the implementation of the program and the distribution of stations capable of filling gas tanks at a high rate. (1 Dice)

[]Petroleum Supply Line Self Reliance: Targeted industrial programs to minimize cross CMEA use of American drilling hardware in favor of expanding domestic capacity will take significant compromises, but it can still be done without excessive disruptions. Prioritizing all domestic supply chains and offering significant benefits for using all Soviet components will be essential towards hardening the domestic industry and further reducing the scope of foreign involvement. The practical reality is that the integration of both industries is still significant but taking measures now will shift production domestically and improve the durability of the domestic sector in case of major disruption. (1 Dice)

[]Energy Efficiency Commissions: Getting a series of scientists together to assess near term viable reductions in primary energy use is going to be necessary to achieve any significant changes. Practical improvements in efficiency are a concept praised by thousands as long as there is no pressure to either implement them or start significant process changes. Even a minor change that risks reducing production is broadly discouraged as a deviation from what works at every level, but some standards against the absolute oldest of techniques can be implemented. Minimal efficiency standards for new construction vehicles, energy efficiency for housing, and several industrial standards can be pushed through without fighting as long as enough scientists are willing to sign off on them but major results will not be achieved. (1 Dice)

[]CPSU Led State Union: Stopping the right wing tendency of separating the state union and further reducing its socialist character is a popular trendline if one that is going to have mixed effects. Ensuring that the party is tightly tied into the union will take some concessions in other matters but its weakness and enforced from above right wing nature make it fertile ground from radical change. Unification of organizational bodies alongside the union's total subordination to the party will give it teeth where the party is willing to be involved but otherwise likely return the conditions of the fifties. It's not impossible to get some of the more aware technocrats to advocate for a line, but the extent of change still can provide a dangerous precedent. (1 Dice)

[]Modernize Industrial Standards: Expanding the role of labor in controlling industry and somewhat shifting the balance towards an increased emphasis on technically skilled labor can ameliorate both the technocrats and more general leftists. Now that there is a surplus of well educated personnel they can receive elevated administrative roles with workers boards in effect overwhelmingly favoring educated party members over current approaches. Expanding their control will be justified through the effective expansion of mid-ranking positions on them, providing improved coordination and subordinating rapidly declining unskilled labor in the long run, even if the current policy is sufficiently rephrased to avoid the implication. (1 Dice) (Supreme Soviet Reform) (Favored by Technocrats)

[]Guest Labor Reforms: Imposition of minimalistic cultural standards on the guest workers alongside removing some of the conditional requirements for the use of unskilled workers can provide major economic stimulation. Workers with incompatible educations from outside of CMEA have a vast degree of economic potential if properly utilized and better economic efficiency focused approaches can improve their useability. Popularized by more conservative voices chasing arbitrary standards of "culture" a political line in discrediting the education and working standards of non-european labor can still pass. This will shore up support from the conservatives and stalinists while further lowering the cost of essential labor in the economy as positions with few protections and even lower pay are formally opened. (1 Dice) (Supreme Soviet Reform) (Favored by Stalinists/Conservatives)

[]Restart a Work-Hours Commission: Verifying the developments of Voznesensky and expanding the assessments of labor can help to continue to provide a scientific basis for improved productivity. Current work hours are optimized for a mixed productive-demand state but can likely be shifted to optimize other aspects essential to economic activity especially now that labor demand has rapidly increased. Maintaining a balanced demand state will be key for stable economic growth especially now that the baby boom is slackening and newly graduating students are available in lesser quantities. (1 Dice)

[]Army-Ministry Budget Requests: The MoD has had too much of a budget for too long and cutbacks are going to be needed to stimulate economic growth. Economic growth forms the basis of the military and the technologies involved rendering it a higher priority to achieve instead of the development of some new overpriced weapon system. Belik is currently somewhat politically weak and not the best liked, providing an opportunity to intercede on the next budget to allocate surplus funding, stopping the growth of the defense budget. (1 Dice)

[]Automotive Reforms: Automotive demand is a core part of heavy industrial growth but slow increases in production have plagued the sector, especially with the lack of allocated enterprise funding. Reversing this will take more time but first reforms can be instituted to open the roads to more motorists, incorporating infrastructure to increase the density of car use and provide for expanded registration. Unified examination standards that do not require as much of an educational basis will increase accessibility and ensure a steady demand base that will further drive economic expansions. (1 Dice)

[]Housing Sector Reform: Current housing programs are working to maintain housing stocks but the massive risk of the Mikoyan era housing decaying has remained a national concern. The homes themselves have held up better than expected but they need to be replaced at an accelerated time frame. Improved apartment models have already been sufficiently developed to reduce costs per unit with current plans simply needing modification. This will commit the Union to the largest housing program in history but in a decade the communal housing form and wartime emergency housing can be left in the past. (1 Dice)

[]Appoint New Deputy(Heavy Industry/Chemical Industry): The current ministers cannot be significantly changed as it would undermine the purpose of the plan and only serve to damage the ministry at the absolute critical point. The selection of new deputies however can be conducted without issue at this point, as long as no one absolutely insane is proposed, they should easily pass the vote of the Supreme Soviet. Fighting for appointing deputies instead of compromising with Vorotnikov will cost some favors, but those favors are unlikely to be onerous relative to the crisis at hand. (Will Cost Favors Next Turn) (1 Dice)


Current Economic Prices(Domestic/CMEA/International): (How this will work is that every action above except for electricity modifies the internal price of the commodities below. They also vary on their own and are sorted into abstracted 1-100 ranges. Modifiers from the rest of your economy are displayed below with each category of goods. When you shift between 20-sized ranges, there can be significant modifiers to the general economy that come from changing prices of core commodities. CMEA prices determine the price in CMEA, though transportation of goods will be a problem with international prices representative of the West.)

Coal Price (59/39/72) Massive Import (41-60 No Effect)
+9 CPSC Power Plants
+4 Western Deposit Depletion
-1 Nuclear Power (1980-1984)
-4 Net Civilian Spending

Steel Price: (39/37/70) Moderate Export (21-40 -20 RpD Infrastructure, Increased HI Growth)
+4 Net Civilian Spending

Non-Ferrous Price: (54/52/42) Moderate CMEA Import (41-60 No Effect)
-7 Net Civilian Spending

Petroleum Fuels Price: (36/36/36) (Middle Eastern Imports(Net 3)) (21-40 Strong Increase in Economic Growth, Fuel Use, and Chemical Development) (+24 Guaranteed Imports/y (0 Currently))
+21 Net Civilian Spending
+20 Production Cuts (1980-1982)
+10 Fields Depletion (-2/y per Year 1980-1982)
+2 River Reversal Flooding
-8 Field Modernization

Petroleum Gas Price: (12/15/NaN) (Moderate Export) (11-20 Start of Fuel Experiments, Preferred Heating Fuel, Vast Expansion of Use) (Rapid Collapse of Petrochemical Prices) (+12 Guaranteed Imports/y (0 Currently))
+8 Net Civilian Spending
+6 CCGT Power Plants
+8 CMEA Utilization (Increasing by 2 Per Turn until +16)
-8 Field Modernization

Petrochemicals Price: (33/34/40) Massive Export (21-40 Massive Demand Increase, LI Growth Increase, Mild CI Growth Increase, and Strong Plastic Use Increase)
-7 Net Civilian Spending

General Labor Price: (50/36/72) (41-50 Slight Increase to Domestic Demand +10 RpD Universal)
+6 Net Civilian Spending
-15 New Graduates
-2 Immigration

Educated Labor: (57/45/85) Moderate Imports (51-60 Slight Increase to Domestic Demand, Mild Reduction to Domestic Competitiveness, Project Cost Increases)
+5 Net Civilian Spending
-10 New Graduates
-2 Immigration

Electricity: 86 CI 20
+1280 Plan Programs
-410 CI25 Net Civilian Spending
